TikTok: the controversial dopamine
addiction app known for silly dances,
absurdist humor, and five-star
world-class education.
You can learn languages, recipes,
home improvement, crafting skills...
...medical advice?
History?
Yeah, it shouldn't come as a surprise
that an app driven by punchy, short-form
video content is a prime environment
to foster, uh, less than ideal academic integrity.
Usually, you'll just get some
lightly misinformed videos,
or confused people with,
like, maybe 200 views,
but in some of the worst cases,
you end up with accounts touting videos
with millions of views that have
unsourced, extremely questionable history;
or, just as bad, try to explain extremely
complex historical concepts in one minute,
that would actually take a mega long
video essay or even a book to cover.
This is kind of the beef that
I personally have with
some queer history education
on TikTok and Twitter.
I think some folks manage
to do it well, but a lot of the time
it's not a topic that can be simplified
or explained in one to three minutes
or a few tweets without losing
some really valuable context.
And even with the good accounts,
there usually aren't sources cited.
But then there's some "history education"
accounts out there that are so bad,
it's actually harmful to a
greater perception of the past.
From the claim that people
pooped on the floor of Versailles,
to the conspiracy that ancient Rome wasn't real,
let's talk about TikTok and its
cesspool of historical misinformation.
Unfortunately, come learn with me.
But before we get into the
tickety-tockety torture,
let's hear a quick word from
today's sponsor: Harry's.
Shaving can be a huge hassle,
especially if you use products
that leave your skin irritated, or
continually run out of new blades
when you need them the most.
I've been a long, long time user of Harry's,
though; so I personally haven't
had those issues in a really long time,
and it's made the whole process
just that much more simple.
Harry's premium blades are manufactured
in their own factory in Germany,
and give a close, comfortable,
and Incredibly smooth shave.
Their new design includes these
gorgeous two-tone handles,
and I got this super fun ember orange one.
And the handle has these little grooves
in it for a better grip, so your hand
isn't slipping and sliding
all over the place - the
last thing you want while you're shaving.
And the weight and curvature of the handle
just makes it feel really
nice and easy to maneuver.
Also, 50% of the plastic in the handle
is recycled, so you're also doing
some good in keeping disposable
plastic razors out of landfills.
The razor heads themselves are flexible,
high quality, and have a precision blade on top.
Also, something that's important to me
is that Harry's has no pink tax.
Everyone has the same fair and affordable price
for razors, regardless of your gender.
And most importantly, if
you've got sensitive skin,
using a well-made shaving gel is so important,
and Harry's gel is formulated with
soothing ingredients like
hyaluronic acid and aloe to prevent
painful razor bumps and irritation.
To make things easy, you can order
their five-piece starter set,
which comes complete with a
5-blade, German-engineered razor cartridge,
a weighted textured handle, shave cream
with aloe, and the travel blade cover.
And when you're ready for more razor heads,
you can make things super simple
by having razor refills delivered
right to your door.
Get your starter set from Harry's
for just $5 by clicking the
link in description below
to step up your shaving routine.
That's a $13 value for just five bucks.
Thank you so much to Harry's for sponsoring
this video, and now, let's get back to learning
about some of TikTok's most
violent history offenders.
[suspensful jazzy percussion]
Natalie Nourigat observed in her Guardian column,
"The use of propaganda is ancient,
but never before has there been the
technology to so effectively disseminate it."
And that's kind of the crux of the issue
we'll be exploring today,
but as always, we have to know how we got here
to truly understand the 'here'
that we're dealing with.
It shouldn't be surprising at all to hear
that propaganda and misinformation
aren't remotely new problems,
and are, in fact, very ancient ones.
From the age of the Romans,
when Emperor Octavian used coins
to disseminate catchy slogans
painting Antony as a drunk womanizer;
to the 6th Century AD, when Procopius of
Caesaria used a treatise called
Secret History to spread lies about
Emperor Justinian and his wife,
and gain favor under the new emperor.
Historical misinformation is,
after all, inherently political.
Joanna M Burkhardt writes in
'Combating Fake News in the Digital Age,'
"Knowledge is power. Those controlling knowledge,
information, and the means to disseminate
information became group leaders, with
privileges that others in the group did not have.
In many early state societies,
remnants of the perks of leadership
remain - pyramids, castles, lavish
household goods, and more."
But naturally, misinformation gets a
massive boost by the inventions
of new and radical innovations to
media and information delivery.
When the Gutenberg printing press
was invented in 1493, it sparked
not only the beginning of mass media,
but a sharp rise in literacy.
Literacy doesn't always come coupled with
media literacy, however; as we well know today.
Many readers were still, and still are,
vulnerable to lies and being too trusting
of authors that they deemed to be
trustworthy, for one reason or another.
As I discussed in my video on Julie d'Aubigny,
many writers and memoirists in
the 17th to 18th centuries had absolutely
no reason to not lie in their works.
After all, who was going to
fact check them to the masses?
And frankly, embellishing stories with made-up
details certainly made them sell better.
That's not to say that no one recognized
that this was a serious issue, though.
In 1710, Jonathan Swift published an essay
titled, 'The Art of Political Lying,'
in which he ominously proclaimed,
"Falsehood flies, and truth
comes limping after it,
so that when men come to be undeceived,
it is too late; the jest is over,
and the tale hath had its effect."
Over time, these lies became part
of historical canon - repeated over
and over and over; and are often
only recently being double-checked,
or even questioned by historians.
And these issues, of course,
eventually led to the first
large-scale news hoax in 1835:
the Great Moon Hoax,
in which The New York Sun newspaper
published six articles claiming that
life had been discovered on the moon.
These articles included huge illustrations showing
strange bat-like aliens, unicorns, and more.
And, obviously, a lot of people read this
and were like,
'Oh, my god! The newspaper is
printing it, so it must be true!"
Tragically, there are no bat people
or blue unicorns on the moon.
But this wouldn't be the last time
people in the 1800s would
shamelessly publish fiction
under the guise of truth.
In 1844, Edgar Allan Poe wrote an article
claiming that someone had crossed the
Atlantic in three days in a
hot air balloon, and then
proceeded to write at least six more
fake news stories in his lifetime,
each time causing havoc for reporters
and the readers who believed the stories.
Which would be really funny, if I didn't
know where shit like this led to, so.
No. Bad Edgar.
And then Washington Irving, the author
famous for writing stories like 'Sleepy Hollow'
and 'Rip Van Winkle,' also
fancied himself a historian.
The problem is, many of his history
books were filled with
romantic fiction played off as facts.
The most famous case that he created
came from his book on the
life of Christopher Columbus, in which
he claimed that Europeans believe
that the Earth was flat until Columbus
proved that it was actually round.
As I talked about in my video on
medieval myths, the Europeans of
the Middle Ages actually didn't
believe the Earth was flat.
They had the science and mathematics
to know that it was round,
and depicted it as such in many illustrations.
But the Flat Earth myth fell in easily
with the Victorians idea that
the Middle Ages was the Dark Ages, and all
medieval people were horrible and stupid.
So this lie got repeated and reinforced
throughout the 19th century,
until it ended up becoming a commonly held
and accepted belief about medieval times.
The Victorians were eager to paint that era as
the Dark Ages because it followed
the Enlightenment idea of Progressivism: that
progress is linear, and every era is inherently
better than the last, in every possible way.
And as a result, the Victorians believed
that they were a superior society - just, uh,
don't look at all the colonization and slavery
and poverty happening over there.
But you can see how that would
give writers and historians an
incentive to lie about the past, right?
The printing press wasn't
the end of media evolution.
With each new invention: the radio,
the film camera, television,
and now the internet, the ease with which fake
history can be consumed and disseminated
has only grown more and more powerful.
In the age of the Internet, it's
now easier than ever to spread lies.
Before, at least, you needed
some sort of credentials.
You had to be a writer, or someone of note,
or had some kind of access to
the rare and coveted tools
to access the masses.
Now, for better or for worse,
these tools are in the hands
of every single person with
access to the internet.
Anyone can, in a matter of minutes,
create an account on Twitter,
or TikTok, or YouTube, and post a video or
tweet, claiming some kind of fact or history,
with no sources cited;
maliciously or knowingly, or not.
And potentially hundreds,
or thousands, or millions
of people will see and possibly believe it.
This, the conundrum we find ourselves in today,
is an issue more serious than we realize.
Few people understand how serious it is than,
well, people like me and many
other historical educators online. Our job is
very serious, because I understand
how easy it is to fall for lies online.
Actually, that was one of the reasons
I made my channel in the first place.
I got really, really sick of going on
Twitter every day, and seeing
people make huge threads about history;
filled with lies or misinformation,
with no sources or shoddy sources;
but worded so confidently
that people believed them.
From issues as benign as the old claim
that corsets were woman-hating
murderous death cages, to issues as
serious as lies about the Holocaust.
Every day it was something, and
every time I clicked on the thread,
I would see dozens, if not hundreds of
people, uncritically taking it as truth.
And I got really, really upset and scared.
You don't know that person.
If you, like me, ask them for
their sources, a lot of the time
you'd get a response with some
variation of "just trust me bro."
Or you'd get ignored, or they'd lash out at you.
[Buster Baxter: "You really
think someone would do that?
Just go on the internet and tell lies?"]
That's why all my videos have
my comprehensive sources listed,
and I spend days, and days, and -days- crawling
through my sources. trying my best to vet them.
And even then, sometimes I slip up.
And if that happens despite the
amount of research I do,
imagine how easy it is for someone
who does basically no research at all
to shit out a video, spouting some completely
buck wild story about history,
and have it reach a city's worth of people.
And few places online harbor this
as easily as the internet's
misinformation darling, TikTok
[music: contemplative piano solo]
I don't know what to blame for
how popular these videos get.
I can't just say it's because
TikTok's user base is mostly kids,
because a lot of people I see
falling for these videos are adults,
and almost all the people
making these videos are adults.
So is it because people on TikTok
are inherently more gullible?
I don't know. Maybe?
I hate to say that because I, too, have
literally fallen for fake stuff on there before.
I am not immune to propaganda.
I think the difference has a lot
to do with the fact that on TikTok,
you're not typically seeing like,
professionals and fancy productions.
You're seeing regular people in their homes
excitedly sharing something
they just learned with you.
And I can definitely see the appeal of that.
That's what my own videos are too, in a way.
But these TikTok videos make it easier
to trust the people making them
because it kind of tricks your brain
into seeing this info as being given
to you by a friend in an intimate conversation.
These folks seem cool and personable,
and you can see their face,
and you want to trust them.
And like, most people aren't going to sit down and
read a brick of a book every day like I do.
And there's also the complicated
factor of like, people wanting to trust
"regular people" rather than academic,
inaccessible, "fancy pants guys"
because a lot of folks online
really easily fall for the idea
that the "higher-ups" are trying
to hide some great secret from you.
And that's where you get stuff
like the Helen Keller conspiracy.
The Helen Keller conspiracy
started sometime around May 2020,
when a user on TikTok started
using #HelenKellerWasntReal
which then drifted over to
Twitter, when Daniel Kunka tweeted
that his younger relatives
had insisted to him that
"Helen Keller was a fraud who didn't exist."
Almost every video on TikTok advancing
this conspiracy usually gets a few people
in the comments challenging it, which
usually get the, 'okay go away boomer' reply.
Many commenters also recount
fighting with their teachers about it
which enforces the idea of their
"beliefs being suppressed."
The root of this conspiracy is
centered on the ableist belief that,
if Helen Keller really was deaf and
blind, she couldn't have done all that.
Haben Girma, a deaf-blind
human rights lawyer, writes:
"The videos may have started as jokes,
but that doesn't change the fact that
they are harming disabled people...
Nearly every disabled person has been told,
at one time or another, 'You're faking it.'"
Keller was accused of being a fake
and a liar even in her own lifetime,
and even frequently by people who had
previously sided with and protected her.
Any disabled person knows just how easy
it is for folks to give up on,
or turn on us when it becomes convenient.
For example, she had largely leftist
and progressive political beliefs
and intended to be involved in activism,
but was often disregarded because
people believed her limited development,
whatever the f*** that means,
meant that she was too easily
influenced by outside voices.
At every turn in life and in death,
Keller was denied the human
right to full agency and dignity.
They conspiracy we deal with now comes,
in part, from the adamant teaching of Keller
as, like, quite nearly inspiration porn,
as many disabled folks who
rise above their circumstances are.
Helen Keller, against her will, was transformed
into an idealized hero figure for youth,
representing a community of people
who universally experience
having their struggles questioned.
It's no wonder then that Keller would be
the one to be centered in this conspiracy;
accusations of fakeness and lies
lobbied at her as a way for young
students to express their frustrations.
The Helen Keller conspiracy isn't
necessarily about Helen herself.
It's a symptom of young people's
poor education and frustrations
with not being taken seriously
by the adults in their lives.
But sometimes historical misinformation
perpetuated by "kids these days"
isn't really that deep. Sometimes, it's just
a really bad case of a game of Telephone.
The 'Harriet Tubman punching babies' thing
started with, from what I can find,
this tweet from Twitter user
queenglitter4 that says,
"Hearing that Harriet Tubman used to
knock out crying babies
because it could get them caught
is the wildest thing I've ever heard
cry laughing emoji cry laughing
emoji cry laughing emoji cry la-"
And then if you scroll down to a reply that asked
where the hell they read that, they reply,
"it popped up on my Facebook feed."
Well, at least they're honest.
This tweet then spread to TikTok,
where it became the subject,
obviously, of many jokes...
["'Hearing that Harriet Tubman used to
knock out crying babies because it could
possibly get them caught is the wildest
thing I've ever heard' Oh my goodness!"]
[Voiceover, screaming: "Don't just stand there!"]
...that only spiraled and spiraled,
until it landed in well-intentioned
TikTok comments on completely unrelated videos.
Which is where I first saw it, and I was like,
you're joking, right? Like, this is a joke?
Unfortunately, it doesn't take much sleuthing
to find out that people are not joking.
So let me break down where
this confusion came from.
Harriet Tubman did not punch or otherwise
assault babies in order to keep them quiet
while traveling the Underground Railroad.
She would feed them laudnum, AKA opium,
in order to, you could say, "knock them
out" or put them to sleep for the journey.
As I explained in my Victorian
medicine videos, giving babies
opium as a sedative or calming medicine
in this time period was extremely common.
So to Harriet Tubman, it'd be a
no-brainer to use this method.
["What's wild is she would often knock them out
by foraging for herbs she knew
could induce sleep in infants.
She'd dose them with different plans she
learned about from her father growing up!
She also used plant medicine to heal wounds!
Talented botanist and herbalist, y'all!"]
So, no, she wasn't knocking out
babies like a WWE Smackdown.
She was knocking them out with potent drugs.
Not the same thing.
Cases like this, I think, show how easy it is
for miscommunication or a confused
reading on a fact can spiral into a frenzy,
unquestioningly accepted by anyone who hears it,
because we're kind of already primed to
accept that stuff was crazy in ye olden days.
Which is why, for generations now we have
fallen victim to the pervasive myth now taking
over TikTok, that the French nobility pissed and
sh- [quack sound] in the hallways of Versailles.
["Versailles was finished in the mid 1600s and
they did not have bathrooms in that b****, OK?"]
This is a massively pervasive myth,
but where did it even come from?
["They had a piss wall, which is where all
the men would go outside and piss on."]
Apparently, Turneau de la Morandiere
called Versailles, "the receptacle
of all humanity's horrors - the passageways,
corridors, and courtyards are
filled with urine and fecal matter."
Another quote from the same source claimed,
"The unpleasant odors in the park, gardens,
and even the chateau make one's gorge rise.
The communicating passages, courtyards,
buildings in the wings, corridors,
are all full of urine and feces."
["It wasn't until the 19th
century that they were like,
maybe we should get some bathrooms up in here."]
First of all, there's one vital missing detail.
These primary sources never said
it was human pee-pee poo-poo.
A lot of the nobility had yappy little dogs and
kind of didn't give a crap, ha ha,
where the pets went to the bathroom.
Here's another fact: despite claims to the
contrary, Versailles did actually have latrines.
They just weren't exactly what we
would think of as a bathroom today.
They were usually a room with a wooden seat
that connected to a waste pipe to a cesspit.
In certain eras it was a chaise room,
that had curtains or screens for people to
do their business behind using a chamber pot.
Still incredibly stinky,
yes, but not the same thing
as people popping a squat on
the palace floor like animals.
["Or they would just, like, go behind
a door and piss on the floor."]
The aristocratic residents, of course,
had their own close stools,
which was kind of like a chair toilet,
basically with a chamber pot in it.
But everyone else had to use the latrine.
This isn't helped by the fact that Versailles was
apparently built on a smelly marsh,
so in general, the entire place just kind of
smelled bad by nature of being in a marsh.
There were some rare recorded incidents of human
people; usually men, and usually the servants;
relieving themselves on the
walls of the palace, however.
But! These were always an
unusual or offensive enough
occurrence that people were very
loudly complaining about it.
There was at least one incident where
Marie Antoinette was apparently hit with
flying sh-[quack sound] when a servant
emptied a chamber pot out of the window,
but this was severely frowned upon, and a
public notice was put up warning against it.
But by the early to mid 1700s,
several residents of Versailles
actually had flushing toilets, and by 1789,
Versailles had nine flushing toilets.
And even that aside, people had no reason to go to
the bathroom on the floor when f******
chamber pots and bourdalous existed.
Ladies could easily just stick that bad boy
under their skirts and go,
since they had no underwear to pull down.
And for men, it was even easier.
Hi, editing me here.
So, another really big factor of the, like,
bathrooms at Versailles conversation
that I neglected to include in the actual video,
is the fact that the French Revolution happened.
And as I've just discussed in previous videos,
like the one on Julie d'Aubigny,
the French Revolution was a time where
a lot of revolutionary writers were,
for better for worse,
making up a lot of slander and lies
about the court of Versailles,
and just the monarchy in general.
They were very righteously angry,
of course, but that leaves us today
with a lot of, um, problems to deal with
because now we have to sort fact from fiction
with all this revolutionary propaganda
that came out during the revolution.
But through a lot of documentation that
we have on Versailles, we do know that
the nobles at Versailles did bathe,
and a lot of them bathe daily,
like Marie Antoinette, for example.
Um, even King Louis XIV, where
a lot of rumors say that he never bathed.
He did bathe.
He had a giant very, uh, luxurious bath,
which he didn't like using that one
as much as the more modest tub
that was in his bedroom.
And there were over a hundred bathrooms
at Versailles which the nobility used.
Each, you know, room that the nobles had,
had a bathroom.
And then other records say that
King Louis XIV listed a total of
264 stools at Versailles, AKA close stools.
Obviously, Versailles was open to the public,
and for obvious reasons,
the commoners were not allowed
to use these fancier bathrooms.
And they would have had to use the
curtained-off, uh, latrines.
That is not to say that nobody
ever took a dump behind the
stairways or on the floor
This isn't to say that the French commoners
were, like, inherently grosser than the nobles.
However, this was not that common
because the people who lived at Versailles
were really, really complaining about it.
And whatever refuse was on the floor
was getting cleaned up at least semi-regularly.
So it's like, long story short, it's a
way more complicated situation
than we have been led to believe.
But even this whole thing about
King Louis XIV is so hard to parse out,
like, what's true from what is fiction.
You can go from one source,
which is a highly reliable source, apparently,
by like, you know, well-known scholars
who say that King Louis XIV did bathe regularly.
And then you go to a different source,
which might be from like Cambridge or something,
that says something like,
"preferred with such dire advice,
it is no surprise to learn that Louis XIV
had just two baths in his life,
both medically supervised,
and both apparently made him terribly ill.
Do you see why this is such a pervasive problem?
Because, like, it just -
nobody agrees, like, at all.
I f****** hate having to, I guess,
defend the cleanliness of
these rich French people,
because I don't even f****** like them.
Like, I've already had some people
on TikTok, for instance, argue with me
like, what's the point of defending
how clean they were, they sucked.
Yeah, I know they suck.
But I would prefer to hate them for
the true, the true bad stuff
than what is fake.
You know what I mean?
Every time I read this whole thing
about King Louis XIV having just two baths,
they never cite any sources.
So which one am I gonna believe then?
But, of course, if someone out there
watching this is, like, an expert.
A doctorate of, you know,
18th-century French things
and you have some firsthand account
that I just haven't come across?
Of course, please let me know,
because as is the point of this video,
I'm always open to correcting myself
if I'm wrong.
Maybe I am wrong.
It's not like I lived back then.
As far as you know.
And here's another very good point,
which a few friends brought up to me
when I was talking about this problem:
if the nobility of Versailles really was
pee-peeing and poo-pooing all over
the floor of their fancy expensive palace,
why the hell would the English
not be clowning them to death?
Seriously. If this was true,
the English would be taking the piss
- ha, ha - out of the French like crazy.
They would never live it down.
But no, nary a whisper about it.
And that's the most damning proof that
there is that this myth is a myth.
This myth, though, is completely
taking over the masses on TikTok,
[exasperated sigh] due to some
viral videos promoting it as a fact.
One of which was posted by a
user named Nicole Mackie...
["They were literally living
in piss and sh-"[quack sound]]
...who had another viral unsourced video,
offering us yet another unusual historical myth:
that people of history free bled on their periods.
["During this time period? Nothing.
They just were free bleeding.
Free-bleeding into their, like,
bacteria bu-"[quack sound]]
Now, I really really don't want any of you
going in and flooding her comments
with hate or anything. I'm sure she's not
doing this out of ill-intent.
However, when your videos are getting millions
of views, you can't be irresponsibly
spreading misinformation like this:
["'Maybe I'll put a rag up around there.'
They didn't have a rag.
They just didn't use one."]
I don't even know where to start with this.
As I just said, no, the residents of Versailles
were not literally living
in piss and sh-[quack sound]
and no, people weren't free bleeding
on their periods, either.
I know this is an unbelievable notion,
but people of history, much like people today,
actually don't like feeling dirty and
uncomfortable and they didn't like smelling bad.
To paint them as such with completely
unreliable "sources" from who knows where
that you aren't even listing, is frankly,
insulting and implies that people in the past
were, like, sub-human freaks.
And I don't think that's fair nor is it accurate.
Even if they are unforgivable rich people.
The wonderful Abby Cox has made
a fantastic video talking about
the history of how people handled their
periods with some really interesting experiments
so I heavily implore you to go watch her video,
which I'll link in the description below,
which actually cites sources, by the way,
as you should.
Now, as it says in her bio and
is clear from her videos,
Nicole Mackie is a comedian, and not
a historian and not an educator.
But one viral video is usually enough
to get a TikTok user to go,
'huh, this type of content is popular.
I should keep doing it forever.'
and after the Versailles thing, she's
really been getting on the weird history thing
Nicole, from one history lover
to another, history is truly
weird enough without
relying on myths.
She really is funny, though, so I do
hope she keeps up the history content.
But you know, with some sources,
and like, good sources.
Because right now learning anything
from these videos is like the equivalent
of trying to learn real history
from Drunk History.
Entertaining, of course.
Accurate, absolutely not.
But not all TikTok users have the
conscience to even bother trying
to tell history that is kind of true.
Some of them straight up lie.
And honestly, buckle up for this one.
Two years ago, a TikTok user
named momlennial, or Donna,
who had nearly a hundred thousand followers
at the time, and claimed to have
a degree in history and anthropology,
made the absolutely buck wild claim
that ancient Rome never existed.
In one TikTok, now deleted,
she claimed that the Roman Empire
was "a figment of the Spanish
inquisition's imagination,"
and that there are no extant Roman
or primary documents with Latin on them,
and that Greece, not Rome, was the "power
player" during the 4th to 2nd century BC.
She went on to compare Rome's cultural
and economic power to "Disney, or the circus,"
despite acknowledging that it
was, indeed, an empire.
Donna, is it real or not?
Then she went on to say that
Hadrian's Wall was a road, and not a wall...
It's literally still there, so.
...and not even Roman.
It is Roman.
Now, Donna, by this point, was no
stranger to making, um,
controversial history videos.
She had previously made videos
claiming that Alexander the Great
was actually a woman, and that the
name Jesus Christ translates to
"cl*toris healer."
I'm not even going to bother refuting
any of this, because it's literally
not worth my time, but if you're interested,
I promise if you Google 'momlennial Rome'
you'll find a million videos from
2021 fighting this woman.
Donna has since, it seems, deleted her
account and remade a new one
called momlennial_returns, where she's
still trying to harp on the Rome isn't real thing,
now doubling down and saying that
what she actually means is that
there is no single Roman culture, which is
not at all what she originally said, but okay.
Anyway.
But the truth here is, to be frank,
Donna, and many creators like her,
is most likely a grifter. I think this
was summed up incredibly well
in this TikTok by Dr. MJ Pardon,
which I will show you in its entirety.
["...but the church would never
do that to white people!"
"Stop what you're doing, and just for
a moment, reflect on your
immediate reaction to that, especially
in the context of a creator complaining
that these are the kind of comments
that she keeps getting on her videos.
This is a great way to start the video,
because we're automatically on her side.
You certainly don't want to be
on the side of the people who are
disagreeing with her in her comment section.
Um, because first of all, sounds like
those people are kind of racist.
Um, and second of all, it sounds like
those people are just regurgitating
this narrative that they've been
spoon-fed by the church,
and we certainly all want to be pushing back
against oppressive institutions that are
seeking to control the historical narrative.
And this is not the only thing that's really smart
about this video, and her videos in general.
You may notice that her videos
are all these sort of short,
very incredulous, kind of punchy debunks.
Or like, how am I the only one who sees this,
like, sheeple you need to wake up.
Um, but she never really fully explains
her overarching worldview
or how these different little
points all connect together,
and that's on purpose,
because that drives engagement.
You then have to ask.
Also, if she started off her video
with the statement,
The Roman Empire, the entire Roman Empire,
as well as the entire Latin language,
was invented in the 15th century,
by the Spanish Inquisition.
And that's a historical narrative that has
always just been protected by "the Church,"
I assume she means the Catholic Church, but
she always just sort of says the Church. Anyway.
The point is, if she led with that, she would
probably lose a lot of viewers pretty fast.
But she doesn't lead with that.
She sort of entices you in,
leads you down the path, and then
eventually, when it's time,
she presents you with sort of
the large conspiracy theory.
Tons of people have debunked this,
um, but also we've been here before.
Tons of people debunked when she was talking
about Alexander the Great being a woman,
or all of her claims about the historical Jesus,
um, it sort of comes in waves.
But when you hear people say or make
comments on her videos of like,
oh, I'm sort of having trouble following this.
Can you maybe just make one video
explaining how sort of all your
da-, ideas connect together?
Or, this is sort of unclear.
Um, that's a feature, not a bug.
Um, that's sort of part of her strategy
for creating these videos.
When I initially made a sort of "debunk"
sort of video for her views, I wrote
a comment saying, you know, I'm gonna
feel really stupid if it turns out that
this is all just elaborate performance art,
and you know what? I feel really stupid.
And to be clear, it's not performance art.
It's just really strategic content creation.
And she's really good at it, I mean,
she has almost 10,000 followers.
She's getting a lot of engagement.
I'm, of course, feeding into that
because I'm a dumbass, um,
but you know, it's not hard to find her LinkedIn.
Maybe this is my conspiracy theory time now?
Anyway, put on your tinfoil hats, people!
Anyway, her LinkedIn - she describes
herself as "a seasoned
digital media expert with 10+ years
experience in content strategy."
She has a lot of presence online in
different forms of content creation,
And you know what, she's really good at it."]
We may never know 100% for sure what her
true deal is, but regardless,
just don't go giving her a hate follow,
or comments, or anything
boosting her algorithm.
It's not worth it.
Regardless, if you see someone online
"teaching history" with no sources,
and you ask them for sources, and they
ignore, block, or get mad at you,
maybe just disregard everything
you just heard them say.
So all of this junk going down
on TikTok is frustrating enough.
Some of it is perpetuated on purpose,
some not.
But what happens when someone
sets out to tell a fictional story
and completely loses control of it,
because it wasn't formatted like one?
What happens when you accidentally
weaponize the pain of lost LGBT history?
[music: melancholy woodwinds]
Disclaimer: this one
isn't TikTok,
but I think it's still relevant to the point.
In 2018, a Twitter user named Guillem Clua
began writing a long, very long, Twitter
thread talking about how; while visiting
a cemetery in Sighișoara, Romania;
he chanced upon a World War One gravestone
where two men are buried together.
Emil Muller and Xaver Sumer.
The thread, now marked with hashtag
#EmilYXaver went on to, in real time,
detail Guillem's journey discovering this story
behind these two mysterious soldiers.
He found out that the two men went to high
school together in their small town.
He posted photos of his investigating, the
locations he was visiting around the city,
following clue after clue.
And over time, a heart-wrenching
story takes shape.
He discovers that Emil and Xaver were lovers
forced to be apart by their families,
and they were reunited just before they were
shortly separated once more by death.
Guillem wrote, "I finally put
a face on the two soldiers.
I put their photographs next to each other,
but their gazes are riveted on mine.
And through space and time, I see
them in a common supplication:
"Tell our story or we will never exist.""
I saw this thread as it was coming out in 2018,
and as I read through it,
my heart felt trapped in my throat.
I remember laying in bed,
reading it on the verge of tears,
because as Guillem visited
local residents connecting hints and clues,
reading through letters and paintings,
watching this hidden story unfold, a love
lost to time, finally resurfacing
a hundred years later - as
many before us have said,
Emil and Xaver were just born too soon.
It's exactly what made me so passionate
about queer history in the first place.
Uncovering, reinterpreting, and loving
these histories is so valuable.
It gives our community a past to hold onto,
and gives us the opportunity to
posthumously pay back
some much-deserved love
and acknowledgment to those
who came before us.
It's extremely grueling, difficult,
emotionally-taxing work that is
frequently met with
severe backlash.
So finding stories like this is like
finding a diamond in a muddy river.
It's like one in a million.
A story like this is every
queer historian's dream.
Except the story isn't true. It's just fiction.
And Guillem Clua was extremely open about it,
after the fact.
The photos were planned and staged.
No one knows truly what the story behind these
two soldiers was, but they were real people.
But because the thread wasn't in English,
and because it was paced out
over the course of several days and
took the form of a Twitter thread,
many people had absolutely no
idea that it was fake.
The headstone is real, after all.
It was truly presented as fact, by accident,
and not by accident, somehow at once.
Guillem didn't clearly acknowledge it
as fiction until the story was over.
So obviously, people felt extremely
blindsided and betrayed.
Because of course they did.
Most of the great fervor surrounding
the story came from excited
and hopeful LGBTQ readers - I
was one of them.
Having the wind knocked out of our sails
felt like the pain of lost history repeated.
The queer community, like any marginalized
community with a history of having
our stories forcibly erased, is an absurdly
bad community to use as the subject
of a performance like this. Guillem himself
acknowledges this pain on one of his
tweets in the thread: "Has their story not been
erased once, as has happened to
millions of other soldiers who rest
under the soil of the whole continent?
It was not fair for me to abandon them
again in that tomb of oblivion."
He was incredibly defensive when the
backlash began rolling in, too.
Clapping back in a tweet
saying, 'Do you really think
LGBT history won't be taken seriously
just because someone wrote a
love story on Twitter?
Yeah, actually.
Medieval queer historian Jonah Kaman wrote
a great article on this whole debacle,
noting, "Yes, LGBT history won't be taken
seriously because of a Twitter story.
When it all plays out on the
background of the history
of queer historiography, 'making history'
itself, which for decades has been
and still is being perceived as fake,
a liberal or deviant fantasy.
You know what the term is for historical
fiction presented as truth? Propaganda.
Queer history in and of itself has historically
been perceived as 'gay propaganda,'
weaponized for the advance of the 'homosexual
agenda'; not an intellectual pursuit
or a right of people to have
a past. Alex Drace-Francis
makes a great point on Twitter that
'this story willfully
overwrites local experiences,
imposes templates on them,
makes still unheard stories harder to
research and recover.'"
This story was very personal on an
even deeper level for Jonah, who was
born in Romania, not that far from where
the Emil Y Xaver story takes place.
The story already hurt the
queer community at large.
The sting is much more potent for
Eastern European queer folks who
have a very unique struggle to deal with.
Incidents like Emil Y Xaver put a spotlight
on how fragile people's trust in history is.
How easy it is to swindle online users into
believing a story if you frame it the right way,
especially when the community you're targeting
is so, so hungry for a shared history of our own.
A history that did exist and is out there, but is
subject to an absurd level
of scrutiny at every turn.
Seriously, every time I make videos
on LGBTQ historical figures,
I get met with a flood of comments
from pissed off people, yelling at me
for "lying about this person's Identity,"
or "turning everything gay."
Even when I clearly have sources cited.
People are already primed to disregard
queer history as fabricated,
to scrutinize it with an intensity that they
never afford anything else.
Incidents like Emil Y Xaver not only
make that problem worse, it also
smacks the LGBTQ community with
one more smack of betrayal,
letting us taste a story we had lost,
before tearing it away again.
As an artist, I can sympathize with Guillem Clua's
instinct to protect the integrity of his art
when defending himself against criticism,
especially since he himself is a gay man.
But that doesn't erase the pain that it caused.
Still, this is why you have to realize that
doing the work as a servant of history
is long, hard, and extremely complicated.
Sources need to not only be
cited, but carefully vetted.
Details are easily missed or lost.
Doing research on a deadline
will wear you down until
there's nothing left
but your bones.
I have some bad news.
[music: anxious, circusy accordion]
Putting on my dunce hat
for this section. [giggles]
I've spent this whole video dunking
on people who have spread
historical misinformation, and yeah,
they all deserved it.
But it would be ridiculous and
hypocritical of me to pretend
that I've never f***** up myself.
I mean, with the frequency that
I put out videos, and the sheer
amount of information and essays and
books that I need to juggle.
It's impossible to not take an L sometimes,
no matter how hard I try.
So, time to atone for my sins
by calling them out.
In my first Victorian Medicine video
a few years ago, I said that
Thomas Crapper invented the
flushing toilet. This is not true,
despite the fact that it said so on a
seemingly reviewed UCLA website.
Dammit, UCLA. I shouldn't have trusted you.
Mr. Crapper did improve the flushing
mechanism, though.
In that same video, I also f***** up
and said that Ibn Sina was Arab,
when he actually was Persian.
Sorry.
In my Lighthouses video, I meant to
say John Brown, not James Brown.
Shame, shame, shame, shame.
In my James Dean video, I called
Sal Mineo a gay man.
He was actually bisexual.
Sorry to bisexuals across the world.
You can have your poor little
meow meow back, he's all yours.
I got this one mixed up because when
reading the sources for that video,
it was primarily sources from the 60s and 70s,
when it was really common to be
calling anyone with same-sex
attraction flat-out gay, so.
Whoops.
Anyway, are these offenses the
end of the world? No.
And when they do pop up, I try my best
to put a note in the description or
the comments to point it out,
so definitely check down there
when you're watching a video,
just in case.
I'm human. I've f***** up,
and by God, I'll do it again!
But the point is, I'm well aware of
like, how serious my job is.
And I don't know how other history
creators feel, but I feel like
it's a really serious job.
It's why, at least for now, I do
iterally every part of it by myself,
so then I can hold myself accountable
for every part of the process.
There is pros and cons to this, and
honestly, I know at some point
I will need to get help,
but until then and even after,
when I get folks in the comments
either pointing out when I oopsied
on a fact, or adding more context
to something, I really appreciate it.
And that's also why I honestly feel
kind of disgusted when people
go online and frame themselves as
educators in order to get views,
but all they do is post unsourced,
poorly researched, sensationalist junk.
Because then as a result,
me and my history pals
have to come in and clean the mess up.
I guess that means that we'll never
run out of stuff to talk about, though.
For better or for worse.
The last thing I want you to get out
of this video is the idea that
I'm making this to make myself look better,
and that's not what I'm trying to do at all.
I mean, look at my dunce hat.
I just want to point these things out
to implore you to be vigilant, aware,
and thoughtful about what you learn,
and what you log into your
brain library as a fact.
Don't be too afraid or too proud to
unlearn something, or acknowledge
what you thought was wrong.
And more than anything, these incidents
remind me that personally,
I can always do better, too.
I appreciate you for trusting me
with your learning, I really do,
because that trust is a really valuable thing.
So until next time, wash thy hands, wear
thy mask, and don't punch any babies.
[electronic baroquepiano end theme music]